Arduino is the main processing unit of the robot. Out of the 14 available digital I/O pins, 
7 pins are used in this project design. The ultrasonic sensor has 4 pins: Vcc, Trig, Echo 
and Gnd. Vcc and Gnd are connected to the +5v and GND pins of the Arduino. Trig (Trigger) 
is connected to the 9th pin and Echo is connected to 8th pin of the Arduino UNO respectively. 
A Servo Motor is used to rotate the Ultrasonic Sensor to scan for obstacles. It has three 
pins namely Control, VCC and GND. The Servo Control Pin is connected to pin 11 of Arduino 
while the VCC and GND are connected to +5V and GND. L293D is a 16 pin IC. Pins 1 and 9 are 
the enable pins. These pins are connected to +5V.  Pins 2 and 7 are control inputs from micr-
-ocontroller for first motor. They are connected to pins 6 and 7 of Arduino respectively.
Similarly, pins 10 and 15 are control inputs from microcontroller for second motor. They are 
connected to pins 5 and 4 of Arduino. Pins 4, 5, 12 and 13 of L293D are ground pins and are 
connected to Gnd. First motor (consider this as the motor for left wheel) is connected across 
the pins 3 and 6 of L293D. The second motor, which acts as the right wheel motor, is connected 
to 11 and 14 pins of L293D. The 16th pin of L293D is Vcc1. This is connected to +5V. The 8th 
pins is Vcc2. This is the motor supply voltage. This can be connected anywhere between 4.7V 
and 36V. In this project, pin 8 if L293D is connected to +5V supply. The power supply to the 
Motor Driver i.e. Pins 1 (enable 1), 8 (VCC2), 9 (enable 2) and 16 (VCC1) should be given a 
seperate power supply. Motor Driver boards are available with on – board 5V voltage regulator. 
A similar one is used in the project. Before going to working of the project, it is important 
to understand how the ultrasonic sensor works. The basic principle behind the working of ultr-
-asonic sensor is as follows:
Using an external trigger signal, the Trig pin on ultrasonic sensor is made logic high for at 
least 10µs. A sonic burst from the transmitter module is sent. This consists of 8 pulses of 40KHz.
The signals return back after hitting a surface and the receiver detects this signal. The Echo 
pin is high from the time of sending the signal and receiving it. This time can be converted to 
distance using appropriate calculations. The aim of this project is to implement an obstacle 
avoiding robot using ultrasonic sensor and Arduino. All the connections are made as per the circuit 
diagram. The working of the project is explained below. When the robot is powered on, both the motors 
of the robot will run normally and the robot moves forward. During this time, the ultrasonic sensor 
continuously calculate the distance between the robot and the reflective surface. This information 
is processed by the Arduino. If the distance between the robot and the obstacle is less than 15cm, 
the Robot stops and scans in left and right directions for new distance using Servo Motor and Ultr-
-asonic Sensor. If the distance towards the left side is more than that of the right side, the robot 
will prepare for a left turn. But first, it backs up a little bit and then activates the Left Wheel 
Motor in reversed in direction. Similarly, if the right distance is more than that of the left dis-
-tance, the Robot prepares right rotation.  This process continues forever and the robot keeps on 
moving without hitting any obstacle. 
